Behaviorism

It is no surprise that when you have a bowl of dog food in your hands, your dog becomes the best show dog on earth, effortlessly performing all the tricks it has learned. Sometimes you may even find your dog running through the list of tricks before you tell them which one to do. When you don’t have dog food in your hands, however, your dog likely seems completely disinterested in performing. This behavior can be explained by behaviorism, sometimes referred to as behavioral psychology.

Behaviorism is a theory of learning; it’s based on the idea that our behavior is learned as a result of interaction with our external environment. Interaction with our external environment can include an interaction with a certain person, a certain object, or with certain surroundings.

Our behavior is learned through a process called conditioning. Conditioning is a learning process that can lead to habits and is the result of training ourselves to react a certain way in different scenarios.1 Behaviorism presents two main types of conditioning:

Classical conditioning: when a dog learns to get excited when we walk towards the bag of dog food because the dog has learned that it would mean they get to eat right away.
Operant conditioning: when a trainer successfully teaches a dog how to sit on command with the help of incentives, such as a treat every time they do it correctly.
Strong believers of behaviorism argue that with the right conditioning, anyone can be trained to do any task within their capabilities, regardless of one’s personality.1

Key Terms
Behaviorism: A theory and school of thought in psychology which states that all types of human behavior can be learned through two key types of conditioning: classical conditioning and operant conditioning. The terms behaviorism and behavioral perspective can also be used interchangeably.

Stimulus: Anything that occurs in the environment that elicits a response from an individual.

Classical Conditioning: A learning technique that unconsciously pairs a specific action, or stimulus, with the resulting automatic behavioral response. When the action or stimulus is repeated, the automatic behavioral response is eventually learned to be associated with the action.1

Operant Conditioning: A learning technique that employs positive and negative reinforcements in the form of rewards or punishments to encourage an individual to pick up or stop a specific behavior. It is sometimes referred to as instrumental conditioning.1

Positive Reinforcement: A consequence that aims to strengthen or encourage certain behavior, such as providing a reward for doing something well.
